EFF leader Julius Malema has revealed that he knows 6o MPs who are part of the opposition&#8217;s plan to remove President Zuma. The plan will be executed during President Zuma&#8217;s vote of no confidence debate scheduled for the 8th of August.During an interview with Reuters Malema said that he has been engaging these ANC MPs. I personally spoke to more than 60 MPs of the ANC who have committed that if we give them a secret ballot they will deliver. They ve asked that this thing must be secret. They are not happy themselves,&#8221; said MalemaEarlier the ANC EThekwini region revealed that ANC MP Makhosi Khoza was identified as a potential puller of the black middle class females. She was approached in early 2016 to consider being DA Premier in KZN post 2019 or in charge of DA benches in parliament when Mmusi ascend to Presidency or be deployed as the Speaker /Minister. It is not a coincidence that she is getting more airtime on media platforms recently. Her target is black middle class women. ANC Ethekwini region alleges that on the 8 August 2017, Khoza will put the final nail in the coffin by raising point of order to ANC MP who will be debating during the motion of no confidence. She will defy the ANC Chief Whip instructions. After the debate no matter the outcome of the motion, She will have live interview with ENCA and that will be streamed to SAFM and 702. In her interview she will attack all the ANC MP who were debating in the motion and tell the public how she voted. She will tear apart the ANC NEC and the Chief Whip. She will wait for her dismissal.DA leader Mmusi Maimane has confirmed speculations that ANC MP Makhosi Khoza is part of DA s plan to remove President Zuma.Speaking during his door to door campaign in Mapoteng township over the weekend, Maimane accidentally made comments about Khoza s role. We (DA) want South Africans like Makhosi Khoza and all the opposition parties to stand together to vote to have Jacob Zuma removed, said Maimane.Maimane went on to say that the DA wants all South Africans to come to Cape Town on the 8th of August to march agains secret ballot. We believe that as people we will be marching, we ve already called for a march on the 8th of August. They must all march in their communities, they must march in the Northern Cape, and they must march everywhere because we want to see a change, Maimane said.Free Subscription: enter your email address:Forex trading is what many people are now jumping into in order growing their initial investments to reasonable sums of money. Forex trading has become one of many ways to make money online. The advantage of trading forex is that you do it in your own time and at any location of your choice. All you need is a computer that is connected to the internet. But What Is Forex Trading? Forex trading is basically to buy and sell currency pairs using an application that gets downloaded into your computer. You can also trade via a broker s website if you did not download the trading platform comments